# Basic definitions for various classes of rings
Original motivation is to lay this out for linear algebra

## Definition of ring
A **ring** is a tuple $(R, +, \cdot, 0, 1)$ where $(R, +, 0)$ is an abelian group, $(R, \cdot, 1)$ is a monoid, and $\cdot$ distributes over $+$.

A ring is **commutative** if its multiplication $\cdot$ is commutative (i.e. if the monoid is a commutative monoid).


## Zero multiplication in a ring.
For any $r \in R$, $0r = r0 = 0$

*Proof:* $0r = (0+0)r = 0r + 0r$, so $0r = 0$ by additive cancellation. Ditto for $r0$.



## Definition of zero ring
A **zero ring** is any ring whose underlying set is a singleton $\{0\}$. The singleton element $0$ serves as both the additive identity and multiplicative identity, with addition and multiplication defined $0+0=0$ and $0 \cdot 0 = 0$.

## Definition of a division ring, field
A ring R is a **division ring** iff it is non-zero and the collection of non-zero elements in $R$ each have a multiplicative inverse: for all $x \in R - 0$, $\exists y \in R$ $xy = yx = 1$.

A **field** is a commutative division ring.


## Definition of ring ideals
If $R$ is a ring, then $S \subseteq R$ is a **left ideal** iff

 - $0 \in S
 - $x, y \in S$ implies $x + y \in S$
 - for any $x \in S$ and for any $r \in R$, $rx \in S$

$S$ is a **right ideal** iff

 - $0 \in S
 - $x, y \in S$ implies $x + y \in S$
 - for any $x \in S$ and for any $r \in R$, $xr \in S$

$S$ is a **two-sided ideal** iff it is both a left ideal and a right ideal.

### Note
Every one-sided ideal of a commutative ring is a two-sided ideal.


## Definition of principal ideal
A **principal left ideal** for some ring $R$ is the left ideal generated by a single element of the ring: $\{ra : r \in R\}$ for some $a \in R$. **Principal right ideal** is defined similarly.


## Definition of proper/improper ideals
$\{0\}$ is an ideal of any ring $R$, as is the whole set $R$. These ideals are called **improper ideals**, and an ideal $I$ (one- or two-sided) is **proper** if it is not $\{0\}$ or $R$.


## Fields and proper ideals
A non-trivial commutative ring $R$ is a field iff it has no proper ideals.

 1. An ideal $I$ is the whole set $R$ iff $1 \in I$.

    *Proof:* If $1 \in I$, for all $r \in R$, $r1 = r \in I$. The converse is immediate.

 2. If $R$ is a field, any ideal $I$ is improper.

    *Proof:* If $I$ is an ideal of $R$ that is not $\{0\}$, then there is an $r \in R$, $r \neq 0$, with $r \in I$. But $r^{-1}r = 1 \in I$ as well by definition of ideals, so by (1) $I = R$.

 3. If $R$ is not a field, then there is a proper ideal of $R$.

    *Proof:* By hypothesis there is a nonzero $s \in R$ which has no multiplicative inverse. So take the principal ideal of $s$, $I = \{rs : r \in R\}$. $1 \notin I$ (otherwise we would have a multiplicative inverse for $s$), so $I \neq R$ by (1).


## Definition of the divides relation in commutative rings
If $R$ is a commutative ring, then for any $a, b \in R$ we write $a|b$ and say **$a$ divides $b$** iff $\exists c \in R$ such that $ac = b$. 

## The divides relation is reflexive and transitive
If $R$ is a commutative ring, then

 - $a|a$ for all $a \in R$
 - For any $a,b,c \in R$, if $a|b$ and $b|c$ then $a|c$

*Proof:* $a1 = a$. Also if $am = b$ and $bn = c$ for some $m$ and $n$, then $a(mn) = c$.


## Definition of invertible elements of commutative rings
If $R$ is a commutative ring, any $a \in R$ is **invertible** iff $a|1$, and we call the $b \in R$ such that $ab = 1$ an **inverse** of $a$.

## Inverses are unique
If $R$ is a commutative ring and $a \in R$ is invertible, then it has exactly one inverse.

*Proof:* If $b, c \in R$ such that $ab = 1 = ac$, then $b = b 1 = bac = 1c = c$.

## Definition of associates
If $R$ is a commutative ring, $a, b \in R$ are **associate** iff $a|b$ and $b|a$.

## Equivalence relation of associates
If $R$ is a commutative ring, then the relation $a \sim b$ defined iff $a$ and $b$ are associate is an equivalence relation.

*Proof:*  Every $a \in R$ is associate to itself since $|$ is reflexive. By definition the relation is symmetric. If $a \sim b$ and $b \sim c$ for all $a,b,c \in R$, then $a|b$, $b|a$, $b|c$, $c|b$. By transitivity, $a|c$ and $c|a$.

## Invertible elements are associate to $1$
If $R$ is a commutative ring and $a \in R$ is invertible, then $a$ is associate to $1$. That is, the invertible elements of any commutative ring is the equivalence class of $1$.

*Proof:* $1$ divides every element of $R$.


## Definition of an integral domain
A ring $R$ is an **integral domain** iff it is non-zero, commutative, and for all $a, b \in R - 0$, $ab \neq 0$. The latter condition is often stated as the ring having no *zero divisors*.


## Every field is an integral domain
If $F$ is a field, it has no zero-divisors and is thus an integral domain.

*Proof:* By definition $F$ is non-zero and commutative. If $a, b \in F$ and $ab = 0$, then if $a \neq 0$, we have some $c \in F$ such that $ca = 1$. So $cab = 1b = b = 0$. So either $a = 0$ or $b = 0$.


## Definition of a principal ideal domain
An integral domain $R$ in which every ideal $I$ is a principal ideal is called a **principal ideal domain**.
