## Plane equations
If we consider a plane (not a 2-d subspace, which necessarily passes through the origin, but any old plane in $\mathbb{R}^3$), then we know that if we fix some normal vector $n$ to the plane, then for any vectors $u$ and $v$ from the origin to points in the plane, we must have that $(u - v) \cdot n = 0$. In other words, $u \cdot n = v \cdot n$. So we can define the set of points for a plane by picking some normal vector $n$ and some real number $c$ and forming the set $\{ (x, y, z) : x n_1 + y n_2 + z n_3 = c \}$. Every such set is all the points in a plane, and every plane gives rise to such a set.

For every plane in $\mathbb{R}^3$ that isn't a "vertical" plane (meaning a plane containing at least two points $(x,y,z)$ and $(x,y,w)$ for $w \neq z$), we can represent a plane as a function $f: \mathbb{R}^2 \to \mathbb{R}$ that assigns to each point in the xy-plane the corresponding value on the $z$ axis that makes $(x, y, z)$ into a point in the plane in question. I.e., for all pairs $(x, y)$ we want the $z$ such that $n_1 x + n_2 y + n_3 z = c$. Or rather, $z = \frac{1}{n_3}(-n_1 x - n_2 y + c)$, provided that $n_3 \neq 0$. But this is true since we are considering non-vertical planes, and certainly if $n_3 = 0$ then the normal vector has no component in the direction of the $z$-axis, which means we can find two points that have the same $(x,y)$ but different $z$-components, hence $n_3 = 0$ implies we have a vertical plane. What I'm trying to get at is that every non-vertical plane can be encoded as a function $f: \mathbb{R}^2 \to \mathbb{R}$ of the form $f(x, y) = ax + by + c$ for some $a, b, c \in \mathbb{R}$. Let's call such a function a **plane function**.


## Linear functions and lines
Gibson defines **linear functions** to be any plane function $f(x,y) = ax + by + c$ which does not have both $a = 0$ and $b = 0$. Such functions correspond to horizontal planes (since the normal vector is purely in the direction of the $z$-axis). So a linear function is a plane function that encodes a non-vertical, non-horizontal plane. Horizontal planes and vertical planes are both pretty boring, so let's call a plane that is both non-horizontal and non-vertical a **fun plane**. I believe there is a one-to-one correspondence between fun planes and linear functions. since the normal vector determines $a$ and $b$ coefficients in the function and $c$ is determined by the "vertical offset" of the plane.

Gibson wants to define an equivalence relation on fun planes by whether they intersect the $xy$-plane in the same spot. Since the fun planes are non-horizontal, each of them does in fact intersect the $xy$-plane at some line. We want to say that two planes are equivalent iff they have the same $xy$-intersection. What is the $xy$-intersection for a plane $P$? Well, going back to the linear function representation, say some linear function $L$, it is the set of all points $(x, y) \in \mathbb{R}^2$ such that $L(x,y) = 0$. So we'd like to say two fun planes are equivalent iff, their associated linear functions have the same pre-image of $0$. We call this pre-image of zero the **zero set** of the linear function (or of the fun plane).

This definition is actually not great, because there's no obvious way to tell whether two linear functions are equivalent. You'd have to somehow determine whether the zero sets of both functions coincide. How can we do that? If $K(x,y) = ax + by + c$ and $L(x, y) = dx + ey + f$ are linear functions, then one way is to determine whether for all $x$ and $y$ in $\mathbb{R}$, $ax + by = -c$ iff $ dx + ey = -f$. Since the linear functions are determined by the coefficients $a, b, c$, ideally we'd like some way to determine whether the linear functions are equivalent just by comparing coefficients.

I'm not actually sure how to push this further. So I will just give Gibson's definition here: linear functions $K$ and $L$ are said to be **equivalent** if, for $K(x,) = ax + by + c$ and $L(x,y) = dx + ey + f$, we have $(a,b,c) = \lambda (d,e,f)$ for some $\lambda \neq 0$. It's obviously reflexive, obviously symmetric (if $\lambda$ works to show that $L$ is a multiple of $K$, then $1 / \lambda$ works to show $K$ is a multiple of $L$.). It's also obviously symmetric: if $(a,b,c) = \lambda_1 (d,e,f) =$ and $(d, e, f) = \lambda_2 (g, h, i)$, then $(a, b, c) = \lambda_1 \lambda_2 (g, h, i)$. So it's an equivalence relation. We call the equivalence classes of this equivalence relation a **line**. Note that if we include horizontal planes as well, then all the horizontal planes conveniently form an equivalence class. So we could've arrived at the collection of lines by just imposing this equivalence class on the set of all functions $f$ defined by $f(x,y) = ax + by + c$ (meaning possibly allowing $a = b = 0$) and then excluded the equivalence class of horizontal lines.

The name "line" is at least somewhat justified since we can prove that any two equivalent fun planes must have the same zero set: if $(a,b,c) = \lambda (d,e,f)$, then if $x$ and $y$ are such that $ax + by + c = 0$, then $dx + ey + f = 1 / \lambda (ax + by + c) = 0 / \lambda = 0$. Conversely, if $x$ and $y$ are such that $dx + ey + f = 0$, then $ax + by + c = \lambda (dx + ey + f) = \lambda 0 = 0$.

## Two points give a line
If $(p_1, p_2, 0)$ and $(q_1, q_2, 0)$ are two distinct points, then there is a unique line that the lie on.

*Proof:* The task is to prove that we can find a solution $(a, b, c)$ such that $a \neq 0$ or $b \neq 0$ to this system:

$$
\left[
\begin{array}{ccc|c} p_1 & p_2 & 1 & 0 \\
q_1 & q_2 & 1 & 0 \end{array}
\right]
$$

But the columns are not independent, so the linear map is not injective and hence there are nontrivial homogeneous solutions. If $(a, b, c)$ is one of these non-trivial solutions, then if $a = 0$ and $b = 0$, it is not in fact a solution since $(c, c) \neq (0, 0)$ (due to the fact that $c \neq 0$ by hypothesis). So $(a, b, c)$ gives a linear function (and hence line) whose zero set contains the two points. Furthermore, since either $p_1 \neq q_1$ or $p_2 \neq q_2$, this is a rank 2 matrix, so the null space has dimension $1$ and hence all the homogeneous solutions are scalar multiples of $(a, b, c)$. $\Box$.

### Discussion
What the last theorem proves is that if any two lines' zero sets intersect at more than one point, then they must be the same line. In other words, no two distinct lines share the same zero set.

## Formula for the equation of a line through two points.
If $p = (p_1, p_2)$ and $q = (q_1, q_2$ are distinct points, then by magic we know that the solution $a = p_2 - q_2$, $b = q_1 - p_1$, $c = p_1 q_2 - p_2 q_1$ is a triple $(a, b, c)$ that works as coefficietns for the line that $p$ and $q$ lie on. To verify, either $a \neq 0$ or $b \neq 0$ since the points are distinct, and then by substitution:

$$p_1 (p_2 - q_2) + p_2 (q_1 - p_1) + p_1 q_2 - p_2 q_1 = 0$$

$$q_1 (p_2 - q_2) + q_2 (q_1 - p_1) + p_1 q_2 - p_2 q_1 = 0$$

So for all the points $(x, y)$ on the line, it must satisfy the equation $ax + by + c = 0$, or:

$$x(p_2 - q_2) + y (q_1 - p_1) + p_1 q_2 - p_2 q_1 = 0$$

It can be verified that precisely this equation is obtained by assuming that the matrix $A$:

$$
\begin{bmatrix}
x & p_1 & q_1 \\
y & p_2 & q_2 \\
1 & 1 & 1 \end{bmatrix}
$$

has $det A = 0$.

Since determinant zero implies the columns are independent and since the points are distinct, we must have $(x, y, 1)$ in the span of the other columns. Also whatever the coefficients are, they must add up to $1$ since the third components of each vector are equal. Such a linear combination where the coefficients sum to 1 is called an **affine combination**. This says that any point $(x, y)$ on the line formed between points $p$ and $q$ must have $(x, y, 1)$ be an affine combination of $(p_1, p_2, 1)$ and $(q_1, q_2, 1)$.

Also, by the basic properties of the determinant, any affine combination of the columns $(p_1, p_2, 1)$ and $(q_1, q_2, 1)$ must give a column $(a, b, 1)$ that makes the determinant above zero, so any affine combination of $p$ and $q$ is a point on the line. This and the previous paragraph prove the corollary:

### Corollary: Parameterization of a line
If $p = (p_1, p_2)$ and $q = (q_1, q_2)$ lie on the line determined by $ax + by + c = 0$, then for the function $f: \mathbb{R} \to \mathbb{R}^2$ defined by

$$f(t) = ((1-t)p_1 + t q_1, (1-t)p_2 + t q_2)$$

every other point on the line is determined by $f(t)$ for some $t$, and every $t$ determines a point on the line.
